The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mrs Dalloway in Bond Street, by Virginia Woolf

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Mrs Dalloway in Bond Street

Author: Virginia Woolf

Release Date: September 3, 2020 [EBook #63107]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS DALLOWAY IN BOND STREET ***




Produced by Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by Hathi Trust.)






MRS DALLOWAY IN BOND STREET


BY VIRGINIA WOOLF




THE

DIAL

[Illustration]

VOLUME LXXV

_July to December, 1923_



THE DIAL PUBLISHING COMPANY




MRS DALLOWAY IN BOND STREET

BY VIRGINIA WOOLF


Mrs Dalloway said she would buy the gloves herself.

Big Ben was striking as she stepped out into the street. It was eleven
o'clock and the unused hour was fresh as if issued to children on a
beach. But there was something solemn in the deliberate swing of the
repeated strokes; something stirring in the murmur of wheels and the
shuffle of footsteps.

No doubt they were not all bound on errands of happiness. There is much
more to be said about us than that we walk the streets of Westminster.
Big Ben too is nothing but steel rods consumed by rust were it not for
the care of H. M.'s Office of Works. Only for Mrs Dalloway the moment
was complete; for Mrs Dalloway June was fresh. A happy childhood--and it
was not to his daughters only that Justin Parry had seemed a fine fellow
(weak of course on the Bench); flowers at evening, smoke rising; the caw
of rooks falling from ever so high, down down through the October
air--there is nothing to take the place of childhood. A leaf of mint
brings it back; or a cup with a blue ring.

Poor little wretches, she sighed, and pressed forward. Oh, right under
the horses' noses, you little demon! and there she was left on the kerb
stretching her hand out, while Jimmy Dawes grinned on the further side.

A charming woman, poised, eager, strangely white-haired for her pink
cheeks, so Scope Purvis, C. B., saw her as he hurried to his office. She
stiffened a little, waiting for Durtnall's van to pass. Big Ben struck
the tenth; struck the eleventh stroke. The leaden circles dissolved in
the air. Pride held her erect, inheriting, handing on, acquainted with
discipline and with suffering. How people suffered, how they suffered,
she thought, thinking of Mrs Foxcroft at the Embassy last night decked
with jewels, eating her heart out, because that nice boy was dead, and
now the old Manor House (Durtnall's van passed) must go to a cousin.

"Good morning to you!" said Hugh Whitbread raising his hat rather
extravagantly by the china shop, for they had known each other as
children. "Where are you off to?"

"I love walking in London" said Mrs Dalloway. "Really it's better
than walking in the country!"

"We've just come up" said Hugh Whitbread. "Unfortunately to see
doctors."

"Milly?" said Mrs Dalloway, instantly compassionate.

"Out of sorts," said Hugh Whitbread. "That sort of thing. Dick
all right?"

"First rate!" said Clarissa.

Of course, she thought, walking on, Milly is about my
age--fifty--fifty-two. So it is probably _that_, Hugh's manner had said
so, said it perfectly--dear old Hugh, thought Mrs Dalloway, remembering
with amusement, with gratitude, with emotion, how shy, like a
brother--one would rather die than speak to one's brother--Hugh had
always been, when he was at Oxford, and came over, and perhaps one of
them (drat the thing!) couldn't ride. How then could women sit in
Parliament? How could they do things with men? For there is this
extraordinarily deep instinct, something inside one; you can't get over
it; it's no use trying; and men like Hugh respect it without our saying
it, which is what one loves, thought Clarissa, in dear old Hugh.

She had passed through the Admiralty Arch and saw at the end of the
empty road with its thin trees Victoria's white mound, Victoria's
billowing motherliness, amplitude and homeliness, always ridiculous, yet
how sublime, thought Mrs Dalloway, remembering Kensington Gardens and
the old lady in horn spectacles and being told by Nanny to stop dead
still and bow to the Queen. The flag flew above the Palace. The King and
Queen were back then. Dick had met her at lunch the other day--a
thoroughly nice woman. It matters so much to the poor, thought Clarissa,
and to the soldiers. A man in bronze stood heroically on a pedestal with
a gun on her left hand side--the South African war. It matters, thought
Mrs Dalloway walking towards Buckingham Palace. There it stood
four-square, in the broad sunshine, uncompromising, plain. But it was
character she thought; something inborn in the race; what Indians
respected. The Queen went to hospitals, opened bazaars--the Queen of
England, thought Clarissa, looking at the Palace. Already at this hour a
motor car passed out at the gates; soldiers saluted; the gates were
shut. And Clarissa, crossing the road, entered the Park, holding herself
upright.

June had drawn out every leaf on the trees. The mothers of Westminster
with mottled breasts gave suck to their young. Quite respectable girls
lay stretched on the grass. An elderly man, stooping very stiffly,
picked up a crumpled paper, spread it out flat and flung it away. How
horrible! Last night at the Embassy Sir Dighton had said "If I want a
fellow to hold my horse, I have only to put up my hand." But the
religious question is far more serious than the economic, Sir Dighton
had said, which she thought extraordinarily interesting, from a man like
Sir Dighton. "Oh, the country will never know what it has lost" he had
said, talking, of his own accord, about dear Jack Stewart.

She mounted the little hill lightly. The air stirred with energy.
Messages were passing from the Fleet to the Admiralty. Piccadilly and
Arlington Street and the Mall seemed to chafe the very air in the Park
and lift its leaves hotly, brilliantly, upon waves of that divine
vitality which Clarissa loved. To ride; to dance; she had adored all
that. Or going long walks in the country, talking, about books, what to
do with one's life, for young people were amazingly priggish--oh, the
things one had said! But one had conviction. Middle age is the devil.
People like Jack'll never know that, she thought; for he never once
thought of death, never, they said, knew he was dying. And now can never
mourn--how did it go?--a head grown grey. . . . From the contagion of
the world's slow stain . . . have drunk their cup a round or two before.
. . . From the contagion of the world's slow stain! She held herself
upright.

But how Jack would have shouted! Quoting Shelley, in Piccadilly! "You
want a pin," he would have said. He hated frumps. "My God Clarissa! My
God Clarissa!"--she could hear him now at the Devonshire House party,
about poor Sylvia Hunt in her amber necklace and that dowdy old silk.
Clarissa held herself upright for she had spoken aloud and now she was
in Piccadilly, passing the house with the slender green columns, and the
balconies; passing club windows full of newspapers; passing old Lady
Burdett Coutts' house where the glazed white parrot used to hang; and
Devonshire House, without its gilt leopards; and Claridge's, where she
must remember Dick wanted her to leave a card on Mrs Jepson or she would
be gone. Rich Americans can be very charming. There was St James palace;
like a child's game with bricks; and now--she had passed Bond
Street--she was by Hatchard's book shop. The stream was
endless--endless--endless. Lords, Ascot, Hurlingham--what was it? What a
duck, she thought, looking at the frontispiece of some book of memoirs
spread wide in the bow window, Sir Joshua perhaps or Romney; arch,
bright, demure; the sort of girl--like her own Elizabeth--the only
_real_ sort of girl. And there was that absurd book, Soapy Sponge, which
Jim used to quote by the yard; and Shakespeare's Sonnets. She knew them
by heart. Phil and she had argued all day about the Dark Lady, and Dick
had said straight out at dinner that night that he had never heard of
her. Really, she had married him for that! He had never read
Shakespeare! There must be some little cheap book she could buy for
Milly--Cranford of course! Was there ever anything so enchanting as the
cow in petticoats? If only people had that sort of humour, that sort of
self-respect now, thought Clarissa, for she remembered the broad pages;
the sentences ending; the characters--how one talked about them as if
they were real. For all the great things one must go to the past, she
thought. From the contagion of the world's slow stain. . . . Fear no
more the heat o' the sun. . . . And now can never mourn, can never
mourn, she repeated, her eyes straying over the window; for it ran in
her head; the test of great poetry; the moderns had never written
anything one wanted to read about death, she thought; and turned.

Omnibuses joined motor cars; motor cars vans; vans taxicabs; taxicabs
motor cars--here was an open motor car with a girl, alone. Up till four,
her feet tingling, I know, thought Clarissa, for the girl looked washed
out, half asleep, in the corner of the car after the dance. And another
car came; and another. No! No! No! Clarissa smiled good-naturedly. The
fat lady had taken every sort of trouble, but diamonds! orchids! at this
hour of the morning! No! No! No! The excellent policeman would, when the
time came, hold up his hand. Another motor car passed. How utterly
unattractive! Why should a girl of that age paint black round her eyes?
And a young man, with a girl, at this hour, when the country--The
admirable policeman raised his hand and Clarissa acknowledging his sway,
taking her time, crossed, walked towards Bond Street; saw the narrow
crooked street, the yellow banners; the thick notched telegraph wires
stretched across the sky.

A hundred years ago her great-great-grandfather, Seymour Parry, who ran
away with Conway's daughter, had walked down Bond Street. Down Bond
Street the Parrys had walked for a hundred years, and might have met the
Dalloways (Leighs on the mother's side) going up. Her father got his
clothes from Hill's. There was a roll of cloth in the window, and here
just one jar on a black table, incredibly expensive; like the thick pink
salmon on the ice block at the fishmonger's. The jewels were
exquisite--pink and orange stars, paste, Spanish, she thought, and
chains of old gold; starry buckles, little brooches which had been worn
on sea green satin by ladies with high head-dresses. But no good
looking! One must economize. She must go on past the picture dealer's
where one of the odd French pictures hung, as if people had thrown
confetti--pink and blue--for a joke. If you had lived with pictures (and
it's the same with books and music) thought Clarissa, passing the
Aeolian Hall, you can't be taken in by a joke.

The river of Bond Street was clogged. There, like a Queen at a
tournament, raised, regal, was Lady Bexborough. She sat in her carriage,
upright, alone, looking through her glasses. The white glove was loose
at her wrist. She was in black, quite shabby, yet, thought Clarissa, how
extraordinarily it tells, breeding, self-respect, never saying a word
too much or letting people gossip; an astonishing friend; no one can
pick a hole in her after all these years, and now, there she is, thought
Clarissa, passing the Countess who waited powdered, perfectly still, and
Clarissa would have given anything to be like that, the mistress of
Clarefield, talking politics, like a man. But she never goes anywhere,
thought Clarissa, and it's quite useless to ask her, and the carriage
went on and Lady Bexborough was borne past like a Queen at a tournament,
though she had nothing to live for and the old man is failing and they
say she is sick of it all, thought Clarissa and the tears actually rose
to her eyes as she entered the shop.

"Good morning" said Clarissa in her charming voice. "Gloves" she said
with her exquisite friendliness and putting her bag on the counter
began, very slowly, to undo the buttons. "White gloves" she said. "Above
the elbow" and she looked straight into the shopwoman's face--but this
was not the girl she remembered? She looked quite old. "These really
don't fit" said Clarissa. The shop girl looked at them. "Madame wears
bracelets?" Clarissa spread out her fingers. "Perhaps it's my rings."
And the girl took the grey gloves with her to the end of the counter.

Yes, thought Clarissa, if it's the girl I remember she's twenty years
older. . . . There was only one other customer, sitting sideways at the
counter, her elbow poised, her bare hand drooping, vacant; like a figure
on a Japanese fan, thought Clarissa, too vacant perhaps, yet some men
would adore her. The lady shook her head sadly. Again the gloves were
too large. She turned round the glass. "Above the wrist" she reproached
the grey-headed woman; who looked and agreed.

They waited; a clock ticked; Bond Street hummed, dulled, distant; the
woman went away holding gloves. "Above the wrist" said the lady,
mournfully, raising her voice. And she would have to order chairs, ices,
flowers, and cloak-room tickets, thought Clarissa. The people she didn't
want would come; the others wouldn't. She would stand by the door. They
sold stockings--silk stockings. A lady is known by her gloves and her
shoes, old Uncle William used to say. And through the hanging silk
stockings quivering silver she looked at the lady, sloping shouldered,
her hand drooping, her bag slipping, her eyes vacantly on the floor. It
would be intolerable if dowdy women came to her party! Would one have
liked Keats if he had worn red socks? Oh, at last--she drew into the
counter and it flashed into her mind:

"Do you remember before the war you had gloves with pearl buttons?"

"French gloves, Madame?"

"Yes, they were French" said Clarissa. The other lady rose very sadly
and took her bag, and looked at the gloves on the counter. But they were
all too large--always too large at the wrist.

"With pearl buttons" said the shop-girl, who looked ever so much older.
She split the lengths of tissue paper apart on the counter. With pearl
buttons, thought Clarissa, perfectly simple--how French!

"Madame's hands are so slender" said the shop girl, drawing the glove
firmly, smoothly, down over her rings. And Clarissa looked at her arm in
the looking glass. The glove hardly came to the elbow. Were there others
half an inch longer? Still it seemed tiresome to bother her--perhaps the
one day in the month, thought Clarissa, when it's an agony to stand.
"Oh, don't bother" she said. But the gloves were brought.

"Don't you get fearfully tired" she said in her charming voice,
"standing? When d'you get your holiday?"

"In September, Madame, when we're not so busy."

When we're in the country thought Clarissa. Or shooting. She has a
fortnight at Brighton. In some stuffy lodging. The landlady takes the
sugar. Nothing would be easier than to send her to Mrs Lumley's right in
the country (and it was on the tip of her tongue). But then she
remembered how on their honeymoon Dick had shown her the folly of giving
impulsively. It was much more important, he said, to get trade with
China. Of course he was right. And she could feel the girl wouldn't like
to be given things. There she was in her place. So was Dick. Selling
gloves was her job. She had her own sorrows quite separate, "and now can
never mourn, can never mourn" the words ran in her head, "From the
contagion of the world's slow stain" thought Clarissa holding her arm
stiff, for there are moments when it seems utterly futile (the glove was
drawn off leaving her arm flecked with powder)--simply one doesn't
believe, thought Clarissa, any more in God.

The traffic suddenly roared; the silk stockings brightened. A
customer came in.

"White gloves," she said, with some ring in her voice that Clarissa
remembered.

It used, thought Clarissa, to be so simple. Down down through the air
came the caw of the rooks. When Sylvia died, hundreds of years ago, the
yew hedges looked so lovely with the diamond webs in the mist before
early church. But if Dick were to die to-morrow as for believing in
God--no, she would let the children choose, but for herself, like Lady
Bexborough, who opened the bazaar, they say, with the telegram in her
hand--Roden, her favourite, killed--she would go on. But why, if one
doesn't believe? For the sake of others, she thought, taking the glove
in her hand. This girl would be much more unhappy if she didn't believe.

"Thirty shillings" said the shopwoman. "No, pardon me Madame,
thirty-five. The French gloves are more."

For one doesn't live for oneself, thought Clarissa.

And then the other customer took a glove, tugged it, and it split.

"There!" she exclaimed.

"A fault of the skin," said the grey-headed woman hurriedly.
"Sometimes a drop of acid in tanning. Try this pair, Madame."

"But it's an awful swindle to ask two pound ten!"

Clarissa looked at the lady; the lady looked at Clarissa.

"Gloves have never been quite so reliable since the war" said the
shop-girl, apologizing, to Clarissa.

But where had she seen the other lady?--elderly, with a frill under her
chin; wearing a black ribbon for gold eyeglasses; sensual, clever, like
a Sargent drawing. How one can tell from a voice when people are in the
habit, thought Clarissa, of making other people--"It's a shade too
tight" she said--obey. The shopwoman went off again. Clarissa was left
waiting. Fear no more she repeated, playing her finger on the counter.
Fear no more the heat o' the sun. Fear no more she repeated. There were
little brown spots on her arm. And the girl crawled like a snail. Thou
thy wordly task hast done. Thousands of young men had died that things
might go on. At last! Half an inch above the elbow; pearl buttons; five
and a quarter. My dear slow coach, thought Clarissa, do you think I can
sit here the whole morning? Now you'll take twenty-five minutes to bring
me my change!

There was a violent explosion in the street outside. The shopwomen
cowered behind the counters. But Clarissa, sitting very up-right, smiled
at the other lady. "Miss Anstruther!" she exclaimed.






End of Project Gutenberg's Mrs Dalloway in Bond Street, by Virginia Woolf

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS DALLOWAY IN BOND STREET ***

***** This file should be named 63107.txt or 63107.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/1/0/63107/

Produced by Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by Hathi Trust.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
